# CellularAutomata
A graphical program that runs Conway's Game of Life using 1-dimensional cellular automata as input.  Allows the user to change the rule used as input as well as the color theme.

This was inspired by a YouTube video by Elliot Waite called "Cellular Automata: Rule 30 fed as input to Conway's Game of Life" - Link: 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IK7nBOLYzdE

Conway's Game of Life involved an infinite grid of cells, all of which are either dead or alive.  At each iteration of the game, the cells are updated according to the following
rules.  These rules all concern a cell's "neighbors," which are the 8 cells that are directly next to that cell, including along the 4 diagonals.  The rules are: 

    1. If a cell has more than 3, or fewer than 2, living neighbors, it will be dead in the next iteration of the game. 
    2. If a cell has exactly 3 living neighbors, it will be alive in the next iteration of the game. 
    3. If a cell has exactly 2 living neighbors, its state will not change from this iteration of the game to the next.  
    In other words, it will be alive if it was alive already, and it will be dead if it was dead already.  

In this project, 1-dimensional cellular automata are used as input (they feed into the bottom row of the Game of Life).

## 1D Cellular Automata

1-dimensional cellular automata operate under a system where each cell has three neighbors - itself, the cell to the left, and the cell to the right.  Since there are three 
neighbors, there are 2^3 = 8 configurations of dead/alive neighbors.  A "rule" for a 1-dimensional cellular automata specifies, for each of these 8 configurations, whether or 
not a cell with that configuration will be dead or alive on the next iteration.  Because of this, each rule can be represented as an 8-bit integer, where each bit indicates
whether or not the rule will give a cell life or death for that index' configuration.  Take rule 30 for example.  30 in binary (8 bits) is 00011110.  
Each of these 8 bits has an index.  The rightmost bit is index 0 (000 in binary), and the leftmost bit is index 7 (111 in binary).  So, since the bit at index 0 is 0, this 
indicates that a cell with three dead neighbors (since the index 0 in binary is 000, i.e., <dead><dead><dead) will be dead in the next iteration.  Furthermore, since the bit at
index 2 is 1, this indicates that if the only living neighbor of a cell is itself (since the index 2 in binary is 010, i.e., <dead><alive><dead>), then a cell will be alive in
the next iteration.

To use the 1D Cellular Automata (CA) as input for this project, each row of the CA is shifted up by one, and the next row is generated by applying the rule to each cell in the
row above.  Eventually the top row of the input meets the bottom row of the section of the grid governed by Conway's Game Of Life, at which point the Game of Life begins.  

## Color

Normally, Cellular Automata is represented as a black and white grid of cells (since each cell is either dead or alive).  For this project, living cells are colored in white 
and dead cells have different shades depending on how long they have been dead for.  There are 6 color themes that the user can choose from in this project.  The default one, named "lilac" was an attempt to recreate the colors used in the YouTube video linked above as closely as possible.

In addition to being able to change the color theme used by the animation, the user can change the rule being used as input to Conway's Game of Life by entering in a different
number (refer to the explanation above about what each number means).  After selecting a color theme and a rule number, the user should press the "Restart/Update Animation"
button to see the new input being fed into Game of Life, using the new color theme.  

## Default Settings and User Interaction

By default, the program uses Rule 30 as input, and the color theme used is called "Lilac."  The user can change either of these settings once the program has begun running.
If the user enters an invalid rule, such as a negative number or a positive number greater than 255, Rule 30 will be used automatically instead.  

## Other Notes

This has only been tested on a Windows PC, and since the project uses the System Look And Feel (The Java Cross-Platform L&F doesn't look as good) it's possible that there
will be some slight misalignments when running this on a Mac or Linux machine.  On Windows, everything should line up as intended.  

Also, note that some of the rules the user may choose to select will appear to do nothing.  For example, it may only show a single line moving up the bottom portion of the
screen.  This is because the first row of input is always a single living cell, so if the Rule does not allow for any cell to be alive if it only has one living neighbor, the 
input will not expand in the same way that Rule 30 will, for example.  Some interesting rules to try are Rule 30, 110, 101, and 129.

## Build Instructions

Start the program in the main method in GuiDriver.java
